message route explanation (#956)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: content/4_Gold/BFS.mdx

### Solution - Message Route

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(V+E)$

> We can observe is that there are many possible shortest paths to output. Fortunately, the problem states that we can print any valid solution. Notice that like every other 0/1 BFS problem, the distance of each node increases by 1 when we travel to the next level of unvisited nodes. However, the problem requires that we add additional information - in this case, the path. When we traverse from node $a$ to $b$, we can set the parent of $b$ to $a$. After the BFS is complete, this allows us to backtrack through the parents which ultimately leads us to our starting node. We know to terminate at node $1$ because its parent is $0$. If there is no path to our end node, then its distance will remain at [INT_MAX](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/types/limits).

Reviewer: > We know to terminate at node $1$ because its parent is $0$

better to say we terminate at node 1 because its the source imo

> We can observe is that there are many possible shortest paths to output. Fortunately, the problem states that we can print any valid solution. Notice that like every other 0/1 BFS problem, the distance of each node increases by 1 when we travel to the next level of unvisited nodes. However, the problem requires that we add additional information - in this case, the path. When we traverse from node $a$ to $b$, we can set the parent of $b$ to $a$. After the BFS is complete, this allows us to backtrack through the parents which ultimately leads us to our starting node. We know to terminate at node $1$ because its parent is $0$. If there is no path to our end node, then its distance will remain at [INT_MAX](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/types/limits).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can observe is that there are many possible shortest paths to output. Fortunately, the problem states that we can print any valid solution. Notice that like every other BFS problem, the distance of each node increases by 1 when we travel to the next level of unvisited nodes. However, the problem requires that we add additional information - in this case, the path. When we traverse from node $a$ to $b$, we can set the parent of $b$ to $a$. After the BFS is complete, this allows us to backtrack through the parents which ultimately leads us to our starting node. We know to terminate at node $1$ because it's the starting node. If there is no path to our end node, then its distance will remain at [INT_MAX](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/types/limits).
```

This is normal bfs, not 0/1

<td>0</td>
<td>INT_MAX</td>
<td>INT_MAX</td>
<td>INT_MAX</td>
<td>INT_MAX</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</center>

After visiting children of node $1$:

<center>
<table className='text-center'>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Node</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Parent</td>
<td>0</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">1</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">1</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">1</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Distance</td>
<td>0</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">1</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">1</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">1</td>
<td>INT_MAX</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</center>

After visiting node $5$ from node $4$

<center>
<table className='text-center'>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Node</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Parent</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Distance</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">2</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</center>

> To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow \text{parent}[5]=4 \rightarrow \text{parent}[4] =1$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 4, 1]$. We break at node 1 because we notice that its parent is 0. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, 3).

Reviewer: texttt?

Reviewer: "back track" or "backtrack"?

> To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow \text{parent}[5]=4 \rightarrow \text{parent}[4] =1$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 4, 1]$. We break at node 1 because we notice that its parent is 0. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, 3).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow \text{parent}[5]=4 \rightarrow \text{parent}[4] =1$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 4, 1]$. We break at node $1$ because it was the initial starting node. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, $3$).
```

> To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow \text{parent}[5]=4 \rightarrow \text{parent}[4] =1$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 4, 1]$. We break at node $1$ because it was the initial starting node. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, $3$).

Author: ```suggestion
To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow \texttt{parent}[5]=4 \rightarrow \texttt{parent}[4] =1$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 4, 1]$. We break at node $1$ because it was the initial starting node. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, $3$).
```

> To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow \text{parent}[5]=4 \rightarrow \text{parent}[4] =1$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 4, 1]$. We break at node $1$ because it was the initial starting node. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, $3$).

Author: ```suggestion
To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow \texttt{parent}[5]=4 \rightarrow \texttt{parent}[4] =1$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 4, 1]$. We break at node $1$ because it was the initial starting node. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, $3$).
```

> To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow \texttt{parent}[5]=4 \rightarrow \texttt{parent}[4] =1$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 4, 1]$. We break at node $1$ because it was the initial starting node. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, $3$).

Author: ```suggestion
To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we backtrack into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow \texttt{parent}[5]=4 \rightarrow \texttt{parent}[4] =1$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 4, 1]$. We break at node $1$ because it was the initial starting node. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, $3$).
```

> To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow \text{parent}[5]=4 \rightarrow \text{parent}[4] =1 \rightarrow \text{parent}[1] = 0$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 4, 1]$. We break at node 1 because we notice that its parent is 0. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, 3).

Author: ```suggestion
To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow \text{parent}[5]=4 \rightarrow \text{parent}[4] =1$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 4, 1]$. We break at node 1 because we notice that its parent is 0. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, 3).
```

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;
using vi = vector<int>;
#define pb push_back
int main() {
	int N, M; cin >> N >> M;
	vi dist(N+1,INT_MAX), pre(N+1);
	vector<vi> adj(N+1);

> 	for (int _ = 0; _ < M; ++_) {

Reviewer: could do 
```suggestion
	while (M--) {
```

> ```cpp
> #include <bits/stdc++.h>
> using namespace std;
> using vi = vector<int>;
> #define pb push_back
> int main() {
> 	int N, M; cin >> N >> M;
> 	vi dist(N+1,INT_MAX), pre(N+1);
> 	vector<vi> adj(N+1);
> 	while (M--) {
> 		int a,b; cin >> a >> b;
> 		adj[a].pb(b), adj[b].pb(a);
> 	}
> 	queue<int> q;
> 	dist[1] = 0; q.push(1);
> 	while (!q.empty()) {
> 		int x = q.front(); q.pop();
> 		for (int t: adj[x]) if (dist[t] == INT_MAX) {
> 			dist[t] = dist[x]+1; pre[t] = x;
> 			q.push(t);
> 		}
> 	}
> 	if (dist[N] == INT_MAX) cout << "IMPOSSIBLE";
> 	else {
> 		cout << dist[N]+1 << "\n";
> 		vi v{N}; while (v.back() != 1) v.pb(pre[v.back()]);
> 		reverse(begin(v), end(v));
> 		for (int t: v) cout << t << " ";
> 	}
> }
> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;
using vi = vector<int>;
#define pb push_back
int main() {
	int N, M; cin >> N >> M;
	vi dist(N+1,INT_MAX), parent(N+1);
	vector<vi> adj(N+1);
	while (M--) {
		int a,b; cin >> a >> b;
		adj[a].pb(b), adj[b].pb(a);
	}
	queue<int> q;
	dist[1] = 0; q.push(1);
	while (!q.empty()) {
		int x = q.front(); q.pop();
		for (int t: adj[x]) if (dist[t] == INT_MAX) {
			dist[t] = dist[x]+1; parent[t] = x;
			q.push(t);
		}
	}
	if (dist[N] == INT_MAX) cout << "IMPOSSIBLE";
	else {
		cout << dist[N]+1 << "\n";
		vi v{N}; while (v.back() != 1) v.pb(parent[v.back()]);
		reverse(begin(v), end(v));
		for (int t: v) cout << t << " ";
	}
}
```
```

### Solution - Message Route

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(V+E)$

> We can observe is that there are many possible shortest paths to output. Fortunately, the problem states that we can print any valid solution. Notice that like every other 0/1 BFS problem, the distance of each node increases by 1 when we travel to the next level of unvisited nodes. However, the problem requires that we add additional information - in this case, the path. When we traverse from node $a$ to $b$, we can set the parent of $b$ to $a$. After the BFS is complete, this allows us to backtrack through the parents which ultimately leads us to our starting node. We know to terminate at node $1$ because its parent is $0$. If there is no path to our end node, then its distance will be infinity (or [INT_MAX](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/types/limits)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can observe is that there are many possible shortest paths to output. Fortunately, the problem states that we can print any valid solution. Notice that like every other 0/1 BFS problem, the distance of each node increases by 1 when we travel to the next level of unvisited nodes. However, the problem requires that we add additional information - in this case, the path. When we traverse from node $a$ to $b$, we can set the parent of $b$ to $a$. After the BFS is complete, this allows us to backtrack through the parents which ultimately leads us to our starting node. We know to terminate at node $1$ because its parent is $0$. If there is no path to our end node, then its distance will remain at [INT_MAX](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/types/limits).
```

<td>0</td>
<td>INT_MAX</td>
<td>INT_MAX</td>
<td>INT_MAX</td>
<td>INT_MAX</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</center>

After visiting children of node $1$:

<center>
<table className='text-center'>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Node</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Parent</td>
<td>0</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">1</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">1</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">1</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Distance</td>
<td>0</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">1</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">1</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">1</td>
<td>INT_MAX</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</center>

After visiting node $5$ from node $4$

<center>
<table className='text-center'>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Node</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Parent</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Distance</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1</td>
<td className="bg-green-200 dark:bg-green-800">2</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</center>

> To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow 2 \rightarrow 1$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 2, 1]$. We break at node 1 because we notice that its parent is 0. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, 3).

Reviewer 2: Do you mean [5, 4, 1]?

Reviewer 2: Also possibly explain $5 -> parent[5] = 4 -> parent[4] = 1 -> terminate$ or something like that

Author: woops

> Do you mean [5, 4, 1]?

> To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow 2 \rightarrow 1$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 2, 1]$. We break at node 1 because we notice that its parent is 0. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, 3).

Author: ```suggestion
To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow \text{parent}[5]=4 \rightarrow \text{parent}[4] =1 \rightarrow \text{parent}[1] = 0$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 4, 1]$. We break at node 1 because we notice that its parent is 0. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, 3).
```

> To determine the path, we can backtrack from node $n \rightarrow 1$, in this case $5 \rightarrow 1$, pushing each value that we back track into a vector. The path we take is $5 \rightarrow \text{parent}[5]=4 \rightarrow \text{parent}[4] =1 \rightarrow \text{parent}[1] = 0$ which corresponds to the vector $[5, 4, 1]$. We break at node 1 because we notice that its parent is 0. Finally, we reverse the vector and print out it's length (in this case, 3).

Reviewer 2: We should just terminate at node $1$ instead of going to 0, right?

Author: well yeah - that is mentioned later too, is that somewhat confusing in my writing lol

Author: er i guess since that is technically not the pathi 'll remove it

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp

> #include <bits/stdc++.h>
> 
> using namespace std;
> using vi = vector<int>;
> 
> #define pb push_back
> 
> int main() {
> 	int N, M; cin >> N >> M;
> 	vi dist(N,INT_MAX), pre(N);
> 	vector<vi> adj(N);
> 	for (int _ = 0; _ < M; ++_) {
> 		int a,b; cin >> a >> b; --a,--b;
> 		adj[a].pb(b), adj[b].pb(a);
> 	}
> 	queue<int> q;
> 	dist[0] = 0; q.push(0);
> 	while (!q.empty()) {
> 		int x = q.front(); q.pop();
> 		for (int t: adj[x]) if (dist[t] == INT_MAX) {
> 			dist[t] = dist[x]+1; pre[t] = x;
> 			q.push(t);
> 		}
> 	}
> 	if (dist[N-1] == INT_MAX) cout << "IMPOSSIBLE";
> 	else {
> 		cout << dist[N-1]+1 << "\n";
> 		vi v{N-1}; while (v.back() != 0) v.pb(pre[v.back()]);
> 		reverse(begin(v), end(v));
> 		for (int t: v) cout << t+1 << " ";
> 	}
> }
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;
using vi = vector<int>;
#define pb push_back
int main() {
	int N, M; cin >> N >> M;
	vi dist(N+1,INT_MAX), pre(N+1);
	vector<vi> adj(N+1);
	for (int _ = 0; _ < M; ++_) {
		int a,b; cin >> a >> b;
		adj[a].pb(b), adj[b].pb(a);
	}
	queue<int> q;
	dist[1] = 0; q.push(1);
	while (!q.empty()) {
		int x = q.front(); q.pop();
		for (int t: adj[x]) if (dist[t] == INT_MAX) {
			dist[t] = dist[x]+1; pre[t] = x;
			q.push(t);
		}
	}
	if (dist[N] == INT_MAX) cout << "IMPOSSIBLE";
	else {
		cout << dist[N]+1 << "\n";
		vi v{N}; while (v.back() != 1) v.pb(pre[v.back()]);
		reverse(begin(v), end(v));
		for (int t: v) cout << t << " ";
	}
}
```

1-index for the sake of consistency (https://cses.fi/paste/c2e58f25327c17a91be50f/)

### Solution - Message Route

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(V+E)$

> We can observe is that there are many possible shortest paths to output. Fortunately, the problem states that we can print any valid solution. Notice that like every other 0/1 BFS problem, the distance of each node increases by 1 when we travel to the next level of unvisited nodes. However, the problem requires that we add additional information - in this case, the path. When we traverse from node $a$ to $b$, we can set the parent of $b$ to $a$. After the BFS is complete, this allows us to backtrack through the parents which ultimately leads us to our starting node. We know to terminate at node $1$ because its parent is 0. If there is no path to our end node, then the distance will not be reduced; it will remain as INT_MAX.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can observe is that there are many possible shortest paths to output. Fortunately, the problem states that we can print any valid solution. Notice that like every other 0/1 BFS problem, the distance of each node increases by 1 when we travel to the next level of unvisited nodes. However, the problem requires that we add additional information - in this case, the path. When we traverse from node $a$ to $b$, we can set the parent of $b$ to $a$. After the BFS is complete, this allows us to backtrack through the parents which ultimately leads us to our starting node. We know to terminate at node $1$ because its parent is $0$. If there is no path to our end node, then its distance will be infinity (or `INT_MAX`).
```

Reviewer 2: You can change a bit (also should INT_MAX link to https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/types/limits ?)

Author: i linked it - can't hurt.
